# ptv_project_bi
PTV project at BI, 2017 - 2020 working repository

Putative loss-of-function (pLoF) variants are of ultimate relevance to Mendelian disease pathology. As such variants in disease-related genes are under strong negative natural selection, their frequency across major ancestral groups is expected to be highly similar. In this study, we tested this assumption by systematically assessing the presence of highly prevalent population-specific PTVs in human genes using population-scale data. We discovered unusually high incidence of population-specific PTVs in all major ancestral groups. Such prevalence of PTVs does not conform to a recently proposed statistical model, indicating either systematic differences in disease penetrance in different human populations or the failure of current annotation criteria to accurately predict the loss-of-function potential of PTVs. We show that low-confidence pLoF variants are indeed enriched in genes with non-uniform PTV count distribution. To tackle this issue, we develop a computation tool called LoFfeR that can efficiently predict tolerated pLoF variants. We evaluate the performance of LoFfeR, we use a set of known pathogenic and benign PTVs from the ClinVar database, and show that LoFfeR allows for more accurate annotation of low-confidence pLoF variants compared to existing methods and scores such as pext. Hence, we believe that LoFfeR can be used for filtering of low-confidence pLoF variants in population genetics and medical genetics studies.

